---
layout: page
title: Seven Deadly Sins

home_url: SDS_Preface.html
prev_url: Envy.html
next_url: Anger.html
---
# APPETITE #

THERE are three appetites, which inhere in the flesh of man-the appetite of
hunger, the appetite of thirst, and the appetite of sex. Of the third of these
I do not require to speak here, having treated it fully in the chapter on
luxury; but the other two call for attention in the present chapter.


## I. ##

Appetite, being part of the apparatus of the human constitution, has, of
course, an important part to play in the economy of life; and it is not its
use, but its abuse, which is sinful.

Hunger is one of the sternest facts of human experience. The appetite asserts
itself every day, and has to be satisfied. The time and strength of the great
majority of the human species have to be expended in providing food for hungry
mouths; and the task has to be discharged on pain of death. The daily lighting
of the culinary fire, the varied labours of the farm, the trades of the miller,
the baker and the cook, the transit of the products of different districts and
different countries by means of the ship and the railway-train and other
conveyances-these, and a hundred other operations, in which the services of
millions of men and women are employed, are all concerned with satisfying the
appetite of hunger. 

In fact, hunger may, without much exaggeration, be called the mainspring of the
whole machine of human existence; for what else is it that sets people every
day in motion and makes them acquire the arts and crafts by which they earn
their daily bread? The appetite of thirst is even more imperative and requires
to be satisfied at least as often as that of hunger.  Happily the means of
satisfying this appetite are less costly, being liberally supplied by the
bounty of Providence. Yet, in the complicated civilization of modern times,
enormous and costly engineering operations have to be undertaken to supply
water to large cities.

It is only what was to be expected, when we consider the loving Providence by
which our life is arranged, that the satisfaction of the appetites is
accompanied with pleasure. The honest discharge of daily work causes hunger to
be felt at the right time, and, as the proverb says, hunger is the best sauce.
It is when no work is done to produce hunger that much artificial seasoning of
food is required to excite an appetite. It seems reasonable to believe that the
satisfaction of the appetite of thirst is also intended to be accompanied with
pleasure; but how far the simple means provided by nature may be manipulated
with this in view, as food is rendered more palatable by cooking, is a question
by no means easy to answer in every case.

At any rate, mankind, in all ages and in all continents, have made use of 
other substances besides water, such as the juice of the grape, to quench 
thirst, or they have fortified water with other ingredients to make the act of 
drinking minister to pleasure.


## II. ##

It is of the abuse of these functions I have 
to speak today. And, first, the abuse of eating is the sin of gluttony.

Savages, whose supply of food is meagre and uncertain, fill themselves to
repletion when they get a chance, disposing at a single meal of a quantity of
food, which fills civilised onlookers with astonishment. The half-savage
civilisation of imperial Rome was distinguished by occasional carnivals of
gluttony, the details of which, supplied by historians and satirists, inspire
the modern reader with perplexity and disgust.

In the moral treatises of the Middle Ages very minute directions are given for
avoiding gluttony, and it is manifest that this must have been a besetting sin
of the monastic life. Inside the cloister there was too little variety to break
the monotony of existence, and the dinner hour naturally became for many of the
monks the most exciting of the day. They are warned, accordingly, against a
number of sins which can be committed in eating -such as eating before the
appointed hour, being too nice about the materials of food, indulging in too
highly - spiced cookery, eating too much at a meal, and the like.

All these precepts need to be enforced on children still, and, no doubt, there
are adults also who would be the better of hearing them repeated.  But, on the
whole, I should be inclined to say, gluttony is a sin, which the civilised man
has outgrown; and there is not much need for referring to it in the pulpit.

Physicians may occasionally give their well-to-do patients a homily on a
simpler life or exhort their poorer patients to substitute cheap but
substantial articles of food for the unthrifty and innutritious diet they often
make use of; but such peccadilloes hardly come within range of the dread
artillery of the pulpit. It is a curious fact that a sin which was once an
urgent topic in the teaching of morality should now be so rare that we can
practically neglect it. Let us hope it is a sign that man is gradually leaving
the beast behind and rising into habits worthy of himself.


## III. ##

Unfortunately, if this can be truly said of gluttony, it cannot be said of the
corresponding sin of drunkenness. While man has been obviously acquiring
control of himself as regards the appetite of hunger, he has apparently been
losing it as regards the appetite of thirst. As we enter the twentieth century,
the testimony of experts is that in the British Isles the consumption of
alcohol per head of the population has increased during the century just
finished by twenty-five per cent; the consumption of the deadlier kinds of
intoxicants has been rapidly growing during the last decade in several of the
countries of the Continent; and the introduction and sale of the very worst
European spirits among native races in all quarters of the globe must be
reckoned among the most disreputable features of the history of the nineteenth
century.

Every single act of drunkenness is a sin. It is a defacement of the divine
image, a temporary dethronement of the power within man, which ought to govern,
and a casting of his crown of glory in the dust. Look at the drunken
man-helpless, mindless, unclean -and say if he has not sinned against his own
manhood and against the Creator of the same. One of the worst features of
drunkenness is that a man, when he comes out of the intoxicated state, never
believes that he has sunk so low as he really has; but, if he could see himself
as others see him, he would have to confess how far he had fallen beneath the
dignity of his being.

The sin of drunkenness is aggravated by this, that it leads to other sins. It
deprives the intoxicated man of self-control, and so gives the beast within him
free scope. What control has an intoxicated man over his own chastity? What
control has he of his temper? He may strike a cruel or even a murderous blow
without knowing what he is doing. There is not a week but the newspapers
contain such incidents, which would, in any other circumstances, make the blood
of readers run cold, but receive hardly passing notice because they arise from
this cause.

The act of drunkenness grows by degrees into a habit, although the victim is
generally unaware what is taking place and is still quite confident of his
power to manage himself long after the fibre of the will is completely relaxed.
The whole moral nature, indeed, is slowly destroyed. First to go is the virtue
of truthfulness; for the slaves of this vice will say or do anything to obtain
what they need to satisfy the appetite, and you cannot believe a word that a
drunkard says. One after another all other fine qualities disappear; and these
are sometimes very fine indeed; for the victims of this vice are frequently the
most gifted in both head and heart.

Nothing is spared, until the end comes. It is said that sixty thousand die in
this manner in these islands every year. What a procession of woe! Yet it is
hardly noticed, it is so common. If it were the loss of a great war, it would
sound, in notes of lamentation and woe, through the land in all the organs of
public opinion, but it is only the nation's annual tribute to its favourite
vice. What a hopeless procession it is, as it files into the eternal world; for
these poor men and women are going to appear at the judgment-seat of Him who
has said, ' No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.'

Only half the truth, however, is told when we thus try to realise the sin and
the misery of drunkards themselves. The evil spreads on every hand.  Perhaps
there is no drunkard who does not infect others with his own vice, for it is a
conspicuously social sin. Besides this, however, multitudes suffer from it
through no fault of their own. The drunkard's home is a proverb for misery and
hopelessness. His wife is kept in a state of never-ceasing suspense and fear,
which no language can describe, and the more refined and sensitive she is the
keener is her suffering. His children share the same feelings of humiliation
and terror; and their health is often permanently injured, because the money
which ought to be spent on their food and clothing is consumed on his vice.

There are tens of thousands of children in our land growing up without a fair
chance on this account. For it is not only here and there, at wide intervals,
that this evil is doing its destructive work-it is everywhere. There is hardly
a family in the country into the circle of which the pain and disgrace have not
penetrated.

In short, this is the national sin at the present time, and it is making our
country the bye-word of the world and drawing into itself, like a chronic sore,
the force which should be invigorating every part of the body politic. The
money, for instance, which should be spent on food and clothing, lodging and
furniture, and which should be making the business of the baker, the butcher,
the grocer, the joiner and the mason to flourish, is poured into the insatiable
throat of this appetite, doing nobody any good. The ordinary mind cannot in the
least degree realise the sum thus squandered every year, though it is named in
words. A short time ago we were all talking of Foreign Missions as the most
remarkable feature of the Christianity of the nineteenth century; but how many
have realised that the total sum spent on this object by all the Churches and
missionary societies of Britain during the entire century is less than the sum
spent in a single year on drink?

A large proportion of the crime of the country has been attributed to drink by
our foremost judges; and to the same cause must be referred most of the outlay
of the nation on the expensive establishments requisite for dealing with crime
and poverty. Yet the wealth of the country is deeply involved in the drink
traffic; and the conversion of so many businesses into companies has, of late,
given many more of the moneyed class an interest in its extension. It was no
figure of speech when one of our leading statesmen said, not long ago, that the
country must either throttle the drink traffic or the drink traffic would
throttle the country.

In writing a lecture recently on the tragedies of Shakespeare, I was struck
with the frequency of the references to this subject in the works of the
national dramatist. Lady Macbeth confesses, she prepared herself, by taking
stimulants, for the deed of crime.

Of the drugged guards of the sleeping king she says-  

> That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold,  
> What hath quenched them hath given me fire.  

In Othello one of the characters says-  

> I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking;  
> I could well wish courtesy would invent some  
> other custom of entertainment.  

And again-  

> O God! that men should put an enemy in their mouths  
> to steal away their brains. . . .  
> O thou invisible spirit of wine,  
> if thou hast no name to be known by,  
> let me call thee devil.  

> In Hamlet the hero says of Denmark  
> what many a Briton feels about his own country-  
> This heavy-headed revel, east and west,  
> Makes us traduced, and other nations:  
> They clepe us drunkards, swinish phrase.  
> Soil our addition; and, indeed, it takes  
> From our achievements, though performed at height,  
> The pith and marrow of our attribute.  


## IV. ##

The magnitude and difficulty of this problem are manifested by the numbers of
the solutions attempted.

The newest is the founding of a society composed of those who pledge themselves
not to take intoxicants except at meals, and not to treat.  This proposal has
been received with ridicule by both the press and the teetotal societies; but I
conceive, there are multitudes to whom it might be beneficial.  There is a
great difference between taking drink as part of food and taking it by itself,
and there can be no doubt that treating is one of the worst features of social
life. A publican has told me that five or six working men will come into his
shop on Saturday on their way home.

One of them treats the whole company, another does the same, and so on it goes,
till all have treated all, and all are intoxicated. He told me, he could
remember when the same practice prevailed among gentlemen at the luncheon bar;
but in that class it had now, he said, entirely ceased-each asks and pays for
what he himself requires, and then departs. And it was my informant's opinion
that the same change among working men would make a world of difference.

It has often surprised me that no movement has been set on foot to change the
intoxicating liquors, which are drunk. No one who has travelled much on the
Continent can have failed to notice how rare it is to see an intoxicated person
on the streets. Yet there is probably more drinking in Germany or France than
in this country. The difference is due to the liquors consumed. If our working
class confined their potations to something as light as German beer, and the
wealthier classes theirs to light wines, there would hardly exist a drink
problem. But it is by the strong and fiery intoxicants used by our population
that the country is being ruined; and few are aware that it is within
comparatively recent times that the use of these distilled spirits has become
general.

In all probability the next great step of reform will be a curtailment of the
traffic by the interposition of the legislature. There is, indeed, an old and
much-worn proverb, which says that you cannot make people sober by act of
parliament but we are going to try the experiment, and that on a large scale.
On this the country has made up its mind. Politicians of all parties have been
very shy of approaching this question; but it overtops all their reforms, and
of this the public mind is becoming so convinced that they will not be able
much longer to give it the go-by. I hope the time is at hand when we shall see
the rival parties competing with one another as to which is to be the executant
of the will of the sovereign people; unless, indeed-which would be better
still-God raise up a statesman of first-class power who will make this the
absorbing object of his life.

There is truth, nevertheless, in the saying that you cannot make people sober
by act of parliament. Merely to shut the door of the public house in the face
of people who wish to go in is a very imperfect cure. How much better it would
be if they did not want to go in, and consequently the door had to be shut from
the inside. Why are people so eager to drink? There must be a vast, dull misery
in their hearts to make them willing to sacrifice their means, their character
and their hopes for the sake of securing a temporary oblivion of their
condition. Everything that imparts to men and women self-respect, that makes
home more attractive, that interests them in their work, that gives them a
future and a hope, is an enemy to drunkenness; and such positive counteractives
must be brought into operation, as well as measures of repression.

But by far the most powerful reform of recent times has been the temperance
movement, which is said to number among its adherents, at the commencement of
the new century, three millions of the population of the British Isles. These
consider the crisis so acute and the temptations so abounding, that, for
themselves and their families, they judge it safest and best to abstain
altogether. But this movement is not, as is often insinuated, one for personal
protection alone: it is inspired still more by a patriotic and humanitarian
spirit. Its adherents feel so keenly the disgrace of the country, the
debasement of human nature, the suffering of families, the loss of immortal
souls, that they are not satisfied with shielding themselves from attack, but
have pledged themselves to attack and to overcome this evil; and they believe
they can fight it best in temperance armour. Many of them would not admit that
they are making any sacrifice, because they consider life to be healthier and
happier without the use of alcohol.  Others feel that there is a considerable
sacrifice in having to act counter to the habits of the society to which they
belong; but they are willing to accept any sacrifice rather than be neutral in
a cause in which the welfare of man and the glory of God are so directly
concerned.

As to each and all of these modes of avoiding and opposing drunkenness, it is
for everyone to be fully persuaded in his own mind; but it will always be the
duty of the pulpit to insist on four things, not as matters of opinion, but in
the name of God -first, that drunkenness is a deadly sin; secondly, that no
drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God; thirdly, that it is the vocation of
Christians to use the most effective means for putting an end to everything
that is dishonouring to God; and, fourthly, that the only perfect defence
against drunkenness is a living, working and rejoicing religion; as the Apostle
says, well knowing why he places the two states in opposition to each other-
'Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit.'
