---
layout: page
title: Seven Deadly Sins

home_url: index.html
prev_url: appetite.html
next_url: sloth.html
---
# ANGER #

ANGER is a sudden heating of the blood, which flushes the face with colour,
while it makes speech forcible and action swift and sure. It is, in fact, a
kind of military equipment, provided by nature to repel wrong and to avenge
injustice.

## I. ##

It is not in itself sinful. There is a verse of Scripture, which says, 'Be
angry and sin not,' and this implies that there is an anger, which, so far from
being wrong, is a duty.  Many times in Scripture we read of the 'wrath of God,'
and we read also of 'the wrath of the Lamb.' In the life-story of Jesus we read
that on one occasion He looked round on a certain company 'with indignation,
being grieved at the hardness of their hearts'; and what an image of indignant
scorn He presented when He overturned the tables of the moneychangers and, with
a scourge of small cords, drove the buyers and sellers out of the temple!

Such instances of holy indignation suggest what the legitimate use of anger is.
It is an upboiling of resentment against unrighteousness, either to prevent it
from happening or to antagonize it and sweep it out of existence when it has
obtained a footing in the world. How natural it is we may learn from the
well-known precept to parents-' And ye parents, provoke not your children to
wrath.' Parents may act towards their children in such a way as to outrage the
sense of justice in their little breasts and make them feel that they are
betrayed and injured by those from whom they are entitled to expect protection.

It is not good for children that this force of indignant resistance to what is
unreasonable should be broken in them, and it is not good for the mature. We
may become too tame. As in a highly-bred horse, however docile it may be, there
always slumbers its native temper, so the excellence of human character depends
on a sensitiveness of honour latent beneath the outward aspect of civility. To
be utterly blind to insult and injury is not the evidence of a superior but an
inferior being.

Especially when the wrong is a public and impersonal one, it may be a sign of
the debased state of moral feeling not to be roused by it to indignation.  When
the news of the Bulgarian atrocities reached this country, twenty years ago,
the majority of politicians shook their heads and uttered lukewarm words of
rebuke, but there was one statesman then among us by whom the outrage done to
humanity was felt in the very marrow of his bones, and he went from end to end
of the country denouncing, in season and out of season, the conduct of the
unspeakable Turk.

Politicians of all parties now agree that, in so doing, Mr. Gladstone was
right; and it is a reproach to our statesmen on both sides that none of them
felt the same consuming indignation at the recent repetition of the same
atrocities in Armenia.

So far from it being wrong thus to glow with anger at public unrighteousness,
it is a sin to be tame and silent. The other day I was reading a series of
articles by a strong young American thinker on the Christian of the Twentieth
Century, and, among other things, this passage occurred: - 'There will be more
and more need of great hatreds. Our talk of charity and tolerance must not
blind us to the call for bitterness and wrath against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness. The Christian of the Twentieth Century will know how to feel
contempt as well as admiration and detestation as well as love.'

It is related of Joshua Leavitt that once he greeted an advocate of the
free-love abomination, who came to see him, with the words, "Sir, I abhor you,
I abhor you, I abhor you." "Do not I hate them, which hate Thee?" asks David,
and he replies, "Yea, I hate them with perfect hatred." It was wrong to hate
them as persons, but it would have been wrong to do other than hate their
hatred of God. Soft and easy toleration of everything will be called by the
honest names of treason and dishonour No feeling of love for the pure can long
survive a decadence of the feeling of hatred for the impure.'

## II. ##

It was right to show that there is a legitimate and even an imperative
indignation, but our chief business in this chapter is with the anger, which is
a deadly sin.

1) It is such when it is directed against wrong objects. The legitimate
objects of anger are injustice and folly; but it may be provoked by the
opposite objects. A man may, for instance, go into a towering passion because a
religious friend displays anxiety about his soul. A son may sulk or even run
away from home because of a reproof or a punishment thoroughly deserved. The
thief is angry because his victim claims his own, and the tyrant because his
subjects assert their rights. Pride and selfishness make demands that are
thoroughly unjust, and wax angry with everyone who does not concede them. Our
sense of our own merits and rights is generally far in excess of our sense of
the corresponding claims of others, and hence arises strife. Anger in one
disputant breeds anger in the other; this, again, reacts on the first offender;
and so it goes on till great sin is the result. It is no unusual thing in a
prolonged quarrel to find that people have forgotten what at the first it was
about. It was a triviality; but the injuries entailed by the contention arising
out of it may be the reverse of trivial.

2) Anger becomes sinful by excess. Even when there is a real cause for it, the
outbreak may be out of all proportion to the offence. 'Let not the sun go down
upon your wrath,' is a precept of both the Old Testament and the New; and it
would be well if this ordinance of nature -the setting of the sun-were
universally agreed upon, wherever the sun rises and sets, as a signal to make
anger to terminate. Jeremy Taylor narrates that Leontius Patricius was one day
extremely and unreasonably angry with John, the patriarch of Alexandria. At
evening the patriarch sent a servant to him with this message, ' Sir, the sun
is set,' upon which Patricius refleeting, and the grace of God making the
impression deep, he threw away his anger, and became wholly subject to the
counsel of the patriarch. The very same indignation which may be useful in its
first outbreak becomes poisonous if allowed to sour into the vinegar of hatred
and revenge; and it is not less dangerous to the breast in which it is
entertained than to the person against whom it is directed. Few more
troublesome guests can harbour in the heart of man than an angry and revengeful
spirit.

3) Anger becomes sinful when it vents itself in ways that are unlawful. It is,
for example, one of the principal causes of profane language. Of this sin it is
the custom of the world to speak lightly, as if an oath or two here or there
did not signify. But no one who knows anything of the love of God can think
without horror of the name which angels adore being mixed up with the filth and
dregs of our angry passions; and, therefore, those who revere the name of the
Father and the Saviour will avoid the occasions on which it is apt to be used
profanely. It is not only, however, in words that anger vents itself, but in
acts, and these are apt to be violent and excessive. An angry man may inflict a
blow that fills himself with horror as soon as the deed has been committed. It
may even be a mortal blow; for he has so lost control of himself that his
frenzy may carry him to any extreme. ' He that hateth his brother is a
murderer,' says the Scripture; he has surrendered himself to a passion, and he
does not know how far it may carry him. Many a murderer who has expiated his
crime on the scaffold has hated his victim less than the man of colder blood
may hate his enemy while yet sparing to strike; but, the deeper the hatred, the
greater is the crime in the eyes of God.

4) The form of anger which has most to be guarded against is temper.  This is
a chronic disposition to anger. Perhaps some have more of a natural tendency
this way than others; but it is very general. How many people will confess that
they are naturally of a hot temper! But this is a poor excuse, for a swift
temper is there to be controlled; and, if it is controlled, it becomes an
ornament instead of a deformity to the character, imparting an elasticity and
spring to action, which is otherwise too sluggish. But a hot temper
uncontrolled becomes a curse in the home. There are no bounds to the violence
some allow themselves; and all about them have to suffer from their strident
voices, ill-natured looks, and unjust actions. A person with a temper can keep
a whole household in continual hot water. Still more intolerable are those who
shut themselves up in sulky reticence, brooding over imaginary injuries, while
the other members of the household do not know how to approach them or get a
civil word out of their mouth.

Anger is, in short, the special sin of the home, and, therefore, it is
specially odious to Him who has set men in families and intends the family to
be the nursery of love and peace. A young man may be preparing for himself, and
for those who will have the strongest of all claims on his affection, years of
bitterness and sorrow by failing to chasten his temper before the
responsibilities of married life begin; whereas a successful effort at
self-control, maintained in early years, will ensure a lifetime of happiness to
both him and his.

## III. ##

Many cures for the sin of anger have been suggested.

Children are often told that, if they could see themselves when they are
angry-the swoln veins, the bloodshot eyes, the distorted features-they would
never again allow themselves to become so ugly. And this is a lesson, which the
oldest of us may remember with advantage in a slightly altered form: anger is a
triumph of the lower nature over the higher-a triumph of the beast over the
angel.

When temper is allowed to have its way, we are reverting to the savage.  In the
Middle Ages the aid of art was resorted to sometimes in order to impress the
truth about the Seven Deadly Sins; and anger was represented as a figure riding
on a camel, the most vicious of all animals, while on the shield which it
carried was painted a mad dog. (On the artistic representation of th Deadly
Sins see the book of Zockler mentioned in the preface.)

Anger is a brief madness; but we advance along the sunny pathway of our own
evolution when we leave anger behind and cultivate thoughts of helpfulness and
charity.

All have heard the practical rule, to count twenty before speaking when angry;
and, joking apart, any device or practice which allows the first few moments of
anger to pass without an explosion is of the utmost utility, because the second
wave of angry emotion is much less lofty and crested than the first.
Sometimes, when an angry quarrel is imminent, it is a good thing to walk off,
to be out of harm's way; and it may shame an angry opponent if one is seen thus
to avoid the triumph of unreason.

Richard Baxter suggests that it is good to tell the person we are with when we
feel the access of angry passion coming on; and certainly there are hours of
inexplicable moody humour when we know beforehand that we are dangerous, but
have enough reason and good nature to be able thus to give warning against
ourselves.

St. Augustine, writing to a friend, the Bishop Auxilius, counsels him, when the
winds and waves of angry passion rush down on his soul, to do what the
disciples did in the boat when the tempest descended on them-call to Christ. If
we could stay to interpose an ejaculatory prayer between the first fiery
sensation of anger and its expression in word or deed, we should not often fall
into sin of this kind; and our self-control would be still further confirmed by
the frequent contemplation of Him who, 'when He was reviled, reviled not again,
when He suffered, threatened not, but committed Himself to Him that judgeth
righteously.'

There are many people who have had hot and violent tempers in early youth but
now exhibit a calm and even disposition; and the change is due to many
struggles, many humiliations, many prayers; for it is by such means, as a rule,
that the victory is gained. But it seems to be possible, at a single step, to
leave the angry habits of a lifetime behind and enter at once into the
placidity and sweetness of the Christian temper. One may get such a sight of
how displeasing a bad temper is to God, and how unworthy of a follower of
Christ, that all at once the violent or morose mood will be slipped off, like a
filthy garment, and the Christ-like spirit put on.

Of this I came across a remarkable illustration in a book I was reading the
other day-the life of the Rev. George H. C. Macgregor, a well-known
Presbyterian minister in London, who was taken prematurely away last May from a
life of great promise. His biographer, a gentleman of good sense and studied
moderation, in describing a spiritual crisis through which he passed, says-
'One striking effect was very soon discernible, of a kind which may well be
recorded, because it is fitted to afford encouragement and hope to others.
Nature had given him a peculiarly high-strung nervous temperament. This was
specially seen from his childhood in sudden paroxysms of temper, in which he
would quiver from head to foot or fling himself passionately on the floor. Even
when he grew up, these appear to have sometimes recurred. It was one of those
things which, because they have to some extent a physical basis, even good men
sometimes almost acquiesce in. One has heard a bad temper spoken of as a trial
or a cross, as if it were, like lameness, a thing to regret, but beyond one's
control or power to alter, to be accepted as a permanent fact of a human
personality. That it is a cross, indeed, every Christian man cursed with such a
disposition sadly knows. The struggle against it is often deeply discouraging;
sometimes the only hope seems to be that it will mellow and soften somewhat as
life advances. It was at Keswick that Mr.  Macgregor first learned to think
differently about this. There he learned first of all, as never before, to
understand that yielding to any evil tendency, no matter how rooted in one's
nature, were it hereditary twenty times over, is sin.  In that season of
self-examination and soul abasement, when, as he wrote, " I have been searched
through and through, and bared and exposed and scorched by God's searching
Spirit," he had a special sense of the evil, and made a special agonising
confession to God, of this besetting sin. And when, after these days of
consecration, he left Keswick, certainly, to a large extent, the evil temper
was left behind. From that time, he was really, in this respect, a different
man. He would never have said, or dreamed of saying, that his inward
disposition was all that it might be, or ought to be, absolutely conformed to
the mind of Christ. Man's goodness is always defective. Doubtless at times our
friend was ruffled. But there were no more paroxysms, and those who knew him
best knew how all but unvaryingly serene his temper was.'
