---
layout: page
title: Seven Deadly Sins

home_url: index.html
prev_url: anger.html
next_url: appendix.html
---
# SLOTH #

## I ##

SOME of my readers may have felt a doubt now and then whether the sins
traditionally recognised as the Seven Deadly Sins are really the most dangerous
to which we are exposed; and this feeling may be intensified when it is
mentioned that the Latin name for the last of the seven is one for which it is
difficult to find a simple and natural equivalent in modern speech. The Latin
word is accidia. Chaucer attempted to naturalise this in English by calling the
sin accidie, and this winter I noticed in one of our religious periodicals a
very able article headed 'The Sin of Accidie '; but not one reader in a hundred
would know, without explanation, to which sin the writer intended to point.

It has even been hinted that the sin itself is one of the past, which has
disappeared from the modern world. We saw in an earlier chapter that gluttony
is a sin of which this may, to a considerable extent, be asserted, and there
can be no doubt that acddia held a more conspicuous place in the life of the
monastic age, when the doctrine of the Seven Deadly Sins was originally
developed, than it does in modern life. ' Those who are fasting about mid-day,
when they begin to feel the want of food and to be oppressed with the heat of
the sun, are most liable to the attacks of accidia,' observes Thomas Aquinas,
one of the great authorities of the pre-Re-formation Church.

Accidia was spiritual torpor- an aversion to religious exercises, which, on
account of it, were discharged perhaps with mechanical regularity, but without
zeal or joy. It might sink by degrees into bitterness of soul and hatred of
existence, and, if not counteracted, it might at last issue in lunacy or
suicide. When we remember how many there must be among monks and nuns who have
no real call to a life of contemplation, it is no wonder if a certain
proportion of them live in a state of chronic disgust with their lot or fall
into imbecility. Many readers will remember Gustave Dory's picture of ' The
Novice '-one of the most terrible transcripts from human life I have ever seen-
a young man with the light of youth and genius in his face, introduced for the
first time among those who are to be his lifelong associates in the monastery-a
row of mindless, joyless figures, out of whom every spark of inspiration has
long since died -and in the one terror-stricken glance he is casting over them
may be seen the whole tragedy of his life as it must be in the future.

Religious exercises were never intended to absorb the whole of our time, but to
supply strength for the discharge of duty in the family and in the
market-place; and the attempt to over-ride nature cannot but have its revenge.
The Romish Church condemns multitudes of men and women, intended by their Maker
for social service, to spend their days in solitude, without the charities of
home, without the presence of children, without the exhilaration of exertion;
and the result must be, in many cases, untold agony and hopeless rebellion. No
wonder that prayers incessantly repeated become meaningless, or that the soul,
shut away from the healthy activities of existence, grows peevish and
despairing. The sin, in such circumstances, is artificial; it is not so much
due to the rebellious soul as to the tyranny of an evil system; and it is no
wonder if human nature breaks down under a yoke it was never intended to carry.


## II ##

But, although artificially produced in the monastery, there is no doubt that
spiritual torpor and aversion to religious exercises are very real sins; and so
may be bitterness of soul and contempt of life; and these are the states of
mind stigmatized by the term accidia.

In the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries
there was an outbreak in literature all over Europe of what was called
Welt-schmerz-that is, disgust with the world, disgust with life, disgust with
everything. It received its most famous expression in Goethe's youthful
romance, The Sorrows of Werther, the hero of which, disappointed in love and
despairing of happiness, shoots himself; and an epidemic of suicide is said to
have been caused by the popularity of the book. By putting his sorrows into
words, Goethe cleared his own mind of the hypochondria by which it was beset;
but at the same time Lord Byron was, with less happy effect, putting similar
sentiments into his poems, in which gloomy heroes rail against the laws of
society and the customs of a world for which they deem themselves too lofty and
noble. But, in reality, Byron was himself always the hero of his works, under a
variety of disguises; and his savage contempt for society and for life itself
was nothing but the weariness of a worn-out voluptuary. He had lost the taste
for healthy pleasures, and had so inured himself to unnatural ones, that at
last he could get true satisfaction out of nothing and cursed the world because
it could no longer supply anything to satisfy his hungry desires. The
Welt-schmerz of Goethe and Byron culminated in the pessimism of a Schopenhauer
and a Hartmann by whom the nothingness of the world was stamped as a dogma and
the existence of an overruling Providence denied.

There is a period in youth when a certain recoil from conventionality and a
certain contempt for the world as it is may be anything but unhealthy; for such
feelings may be the seeds of progress. Young eyes see with astonishing
clearness what is noble and what is base, what is right and what is wrong; they
criticize without hesitation what offends their sense of justice; and, if they
consecrate their energies to the task of remedying the evils they discern,
great good may come of their noble discontent. But merely to criticize and do
nothing cannot have a good influence.  It sours the temper and produces a
spirit of discontentment not only towards one's fellow-creatures but even
towards Providence itself. Especially as old age approaches, this spirit ought
to be carefully guarded against. Many men, as they leave middle age behind,
perceive that they have scored less highly than they had expected in the game
of life, and yet their chatice is past, never to return. Then comes the
temptation to grow bitter against those who have been more successful and to
refuse, because the great prize has been missed, to accept such opportunities
as fortune may offer and to make the most of them. The sunshine fades from the
landscape, and a gloom sets in which nothing can lift. ' The Fathers of the
Church often urge it with special emphasis, that a dejection and sorrow
entirely absorbing a man is at bottom nothing but ungodliness, and proceeds
from the devil, for it arises from unbelief in the gospel of Christ, and
unthankfulness for the grace of God revealed in Christ.' (see Martenson,
Ethics)

The inability to find any joy or satisfaction in the allotments of Providence
is not, however, confined to those to whom the course of fortune has proved
unkind; for the most utter weariness and disenchantment with existence will not
infrequently be found in those who appear surrounded with every comfort or even
luxury.

I quote the following from the paper on 'The Sin of Accidie,' to which I
alluded above: -' A large number of women in comfortable suburban homes are
afflicted in this way.  The necessaries, and many of the luxuries of life, are
secured to them; their husbands are in the city and their children at school;
there is no immediate point of interest that appeals to them. Outwardly they
might not unreasonably be expected to be thoroughly and unreservedly happy. And
yet many a poor man's wife, who has to earn her living in addition to caring
for her husband and children, is ten times as happy as the employer's wife, who
has no such strain put upon her, but who, nevertheless, is profoundly miserable
in the midst of her comforts-just because she has so little demand made upon
her energies. The remedy here is to find some channel of Christian and
philanthropic work into which to throw the mind's energies and the heart's
love. It is wonderful what a medicine for accidie is found in disinterested and
hearty service for others.  The fogs of melancholia vanish, and the inner
sunshine returns, when we do something for another human being whom we can
benefit. How many miserable women would be happy if once they tasted the joy of
doing good.'


## III ##

'Sloth' is the term I have chosen, in the title of this chapter, for the old
theological word accidia ', and, although it is hardly wide enough to cover all
that was intended, it yet has an extensive scope, and is capable of bringing
the sin home to our own consciences.

Spiritual sloth or torpor is exhibited on a vast scale by those classes of the
community that entirely neglect the worship of God. These are often spoken of,
under the name of the lapsed masses, as if their condition were their
misfortune and not their fault. But they are all the creatures of God, living
on His bounty; in a thousand ways they have experienced His goodness and mercy;
many of them are daily receiving at His hand all things richly to enjoy-for the
lapsed are not confined to the poor-and yet they give Him no thanks and take no
pains to stir up their hearts to gratitude and praise, but, on the contrary,
keep Him as far as possible out of their knowledge. They are suppressing the
most glorious powers of their own being; for undoubtedly the noblest part of
man is that which links him with the divine. I like to see in the streets, on
Sunday evenings, the groups round open-air preachers, for these are an evidence
that even in the most careless and abandoned there exist chords that vibrate to
the Word of God and the tones of worship. But the godward powers within us
ought not to be left to such casual impulses: they need careful and constant
culture, and the place to obtain this is the house of God.

Irregularity and carelessness on the part of those who are connected with the
Church are generally due to the same cause. Indeed, I am inclined to think that
there is no greater enemy of the Church than sloth. Persons keeping lodgers
have often complained to me of the way in which, on the Lord's Day all the
arrangements of the household are thrown into confusion by those who are not
only prevented by their own sloth from being in the house of God but prevent
others also from attending who would like to be present. Yet the fault is not
all on one side, for young men have complained to me that it was impossible for
them to attend the Sabbath Morning Meeting because of the delay and lateness on
Sabbath morning in their lodgings. Such malarrangements may appear to be
trifles; but, if their effect be to stunt the growth of character at the
critical stage, and thus to destroy the powers and influence of the whole
subsequent life, it is manifest how serious they are. Nothing can be a trifle,
which interferes with the work of the Spirit of God.

I remember an intimate friend, when we were fellow-students together, after he
had passed through a great spiritual crisis, saying to me, ' I have been
perishing through sheer sloth.' What he meant was, that for years he had been
quite well aware that it was his duty to be up and doing-acting on his
convictions confessing his Saviour, and taking his share in God's work-but that
he had procrastinated owing to a kind of torpor and unwillingness to be
bothered. Does not his confession sum up the real history of many a soul?

There are times when a sort of spiritual numbness steals over the spirit.
Prayer becomes remiss; the Scriptures become dry, and the reading of them a
duty more than a pleasure; motives which have stirred us to the depths of our
being appear no longer to act. In this condition evil habits come back and
secure a footing in the places from which they have been dislodged; we begin to
think we have been too puritanical in denying ourselves and breaking with the
world, and we venture upon dubious paths on the plea that they cannot be
demonstrated to be absolutely wrong. This is backsliding; and what does it
consist in, when you examine it closely, but spiritual sloth?


## IV ##

The grand remedy for such a state of decay is to remember that the normal
condition of a Christian is one of joy. Joy is not only an occasional
privilege, but a constant duty-' Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again I say,
Rejoice.' There is something defective in our religion if it does not fill us
with a happiness, which is fatal to indifference or despair. If we are
acquainted with the redeeming love of Christ, surely there is fire enough in it
to keep our hearts warm. The Spirit of God is given to them that ask Him; and
to be filled with the Spirit is to be borne along by an inspiration which
supplies to all our endeavours a strength above our own.

I repeat what was suggested in the extract quoted already from the article on
'The Sin of Accidie'-that the secret of spiritual health and happiness is, to
be engaged in doing good. When a man's religion is confined to his own breast
and is limited to anxiety about his own eternal welfare, it is no wonder if it
becomes dreary and morbid; for he is like a person who never breathes the fresh
air or takes any exercise: he is not fulfilling the conditions of health. But
let him interest himself in others, let him confess the Saviour, let him
cultivate Christian fellowship, let him lend a hand to help those who are
trying to make the world better and to bring in the kingdom of God, and, as the
colour comes to the cheeks of him who climbs a mountain, so he will find that
doubt and indifference take flight from his soul, and that the joy of the Lord
is his strength.
